# Dimensions Explained

## Dimension Types

- **Changing Dimension** 
	- Changing dimension is the dimension which has at least one attribute whose value would change over the time.
- **Slowly Changing Dimensions** 
	- Attributes of a dimension that would undergo changes over time. It depends on the business requirement whether particular attribute history of changes should be preserved in the warehouse. Example: Employee work location attribute may undergo changes over time not frequently. This is called a Slowly Changing Attribute and a dimension containing such an attribute is called a Slowly Changing Dimension.
- **Rapidly Changing Dimensions** 
	- A dimension attribute that changes frequently is a Rapidly Changing Attribute. For example, a CurrentLocation attribute for an Employee may change very frequently. If you don’t need to track the changes, the Rapidly Changing Attribute is no problem, but if you do need to track the changes, using a standard Slowly Changing Dimension technique can result in a huge inflation of the size of the dimension. One solution is to move the attribute to its own dimension, with a separate foreign key in the fact table. This new dimension is called a Rapidly Changing Dimension. Deciding if an attribute should be moved into a Rapidly Changing Dimension or kept in a Slowly Changing Dimension is up to the data architect. The decision depends on factors such as disk space, performance, expected data volume, history preservation etc
- **Junk Dimensions** 
	- A junk dimension is a single table with a combination of different and unrelated attributes to avoid having a large number of foreign keys in the fact table. Junk dimensions are often created to manage the foreign keys created by Rapidly Changing Dimensions. If you have bit-mapped indexes available, you may not need to create separate Junk dimensions, because the multiple, small-cardinality foreign keys can be managed efficiently.
- **Inferred Dimensions** 
	- While loading fact records, a dimension record may not yet be ready. One solution is to generate an surrogate key with Null for all the other attributes. This should technically be called an _inferred member_, but is often called an _inferred dimension_.
- **Conformed Dimensions:** 
	- A Dimension that is used in multiple locations is called a _conformed dimension._ A conformed dimension may be used with multiple fact tables in a single database, or across multiple data marts or data warehouses.
- **Degenerate Dimensions:** 
	- A degenerate dimension is when the dimension attribute is stored as part of fact table, and not in a separate dimension table. Common examples include Order Line Number or Transaction Number. These are essentially dimension keys for which there are no other attributes. In a data warehouse, these are often used as the result of a _drill through_ query to analyze the source of an aggregated number in a report. You can use these values to trace back to transactions in the OLTP system. 
- **Role Playing Dimensions:** 
	- A role-playing dimension is one where the same dimension key—along with its associated attributes—can be joined to more than one foreign key in the fact table. For example, a fact table may include foreign keys for both Ship Date and Delivery Date. But the same date dimension attributes apply to each foreign key, so you can join the same dimension table to both foreign keys. Here the date dimension is taking multiple roles to map ship date as well as delivery date, and hence the name of Role Playing dimension.
- **Shrunken Dimensions:** 
	- A shrunken dimension is a subset of another dimension. For example, the Orders fact table may include a foreign key for Product, but the Target fact table may include a foreign key only for ProductCategory, which is in the Product table, but much less granular. Creating a smaller dimension table, with ProductCategory as its primary key, is one way of dealing with this situation of heterogeneous grain. If the Product dimension is snowflaked, there is probably already a separate table for ProductCategory, which can serve as the Shrunken Dimension.
- **Outtriggers:**
	- Sometimes a dimension attribute can have multiple values for a single dimension key member. For example, a customer may have multiple accounts. One solution is to create a separate table with Customer Account as its logical primary key. An outrigger dimension is the logical inverse of a shrunken dimension.
- **Static Dimensions** 
	- Static dimensions are not extracted from the original data source, but are created within the context of the data warehouse. A static dimension can be loaded manually—for example with Status codes—or it can be generated by a procedure, such as a Date or Time dimension.  

## Identifying dimensions

• Dimensions provide the 'who, what, where, when and why' that is applied to the 'how much' fact.  
• Lookup tables and master tables which generally act as a primary key tables in OLTP would end up as dimensions in warehouse  
• For normalization reasons, there can be more than one table for a single entity in OLTP such as customer table and customer address table, both of them can make it up to one dimension in warehouse as a part of the denormalization process  
• Dimensions are typically highly denormalized and descriptive. They are typically text fields, and serve as context for the facts  
• Dimensions can be left as degenerate dimensions whenever they make sense by themselves, provided that they do not have additional attributes. One reason for creating a separate dimension table is if you want to report on “missing” values from the fact table: the dimension table can include all possible values, not just the ones for which there are fact transactions. By creating an outer join, you can find members that do not have fact transactions.  
• Dimensions are some times referred to as _causal_: they contain the causal factors responsible for the collected measures (for example, dimension Promotion)  
• If the attributes are connected in one or more hierarchies then these are usually captured in the dimension table  
• Dimension attributes are business descriptors users believe are of significance to understanding the measures in the fact table  
• Dimension attributes are usually discrete (not continuous) and are often used as the source of constraints. Some dimension attributes may be continuous—for example the list price for products. Continuous values are not useful for grouping. You can often convert a continuous value into discrete buckets. For example, converting prices into High, Medium, Low.  
• Dimension attributes usually have a limited cardinality at least when compared to facts, which come from OLTP transactions  
• User input and evaluation of existing business reports help define the dimensions to include in the data warehouse. The words “by”, “for”, “of”, and “in” often flag a dimension.  
◇ A user who wants to see data _by_ sales region and _by_ product has just identified two dimensions (geography and product).  
◇ Business reports that group sales _by_ salesperson or sales _by_ customer identify two more dimensions (salesforce and customer).  
◇ The question, "What were the sales _of_ food items _in_ the northwest region _for_ the third quarter of 1999?" represents the use of three dimensions (product, geography, time) to specify the information to be summarized